>> Stewart: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SUNDAY, NOVEMBER 30:
OFFICER DARREN WILSON RESIGNS AS
THE MARCH FROM FERGUSON TO THE
STATE CAPITAL ENTERS ITS SECOND
DAY.
INSIDE THE NUMBERS-- HOW
RETAILERS AND SHOPPERS ALIKE ARE
FEELING SO FAR THIS HOLIDAY
SEASON.
AND NEW OPTIONS THAT MAY HELP
THOSE WITH STUDENT LOANS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
ALISON STEWART.
>> Stewart: GOOD EVENING, THANKS
FOR JOINING US.
I'M ALISON STEWART IN FOR HARI
SREENIVASAN.
DEMONSTRATORS ARE NEARING THE
END OF DAY TWO OF A WEEK-LONG
MARCH ACROSS MISSOURI.
THEY'RE PROTESTING A GRAND
JURY'S DECISION NOT TO CHARGE A
WHITE POLICE OFFICER FOR KILLING
AN UNARMED BLACK TEEN.
THE MARCH HAS BEEN PEACEFUL SO
FAR.
THE NAACP SAYS ABOUT 100
PROTESTERS ARE MAKING THE 120
MILE JOURNEY FROM FERGUSON TO
THE GOVERNOR'S MANSION IN
JEFFERSON CITY.
DARREN WILSON, THE POLICE
OFFICER WHO FATALLY SHOT MICHAEL
BROWN, RESIGNED YESTERDAY.
IN HIS RESIGNATION LETTER,
WILSON SAID HE DIDN'T WANT HIS
CONTINUED EMPLOYMENT TO PUT
RESIDENTS OR OTHER OFFICERS AT
RISK.
TODAY, THE MAYOR OF FERGUSON
SAID WILSON WILL NOT BE OFFERED
A SEVERANCE PACKAGE.
THE MAYOR ALSO ANNOUNCED A NEW
COMMUNITY OUTREACH PROGRAM TO
INCREASE THE NUMBER OF AFRICAN-
AMERICANS ON THE FERGUSON POLICE
FORCE.
>> THEY CITY OF FERGUSON HAS
ESTABLISHED A SCHOLARSHIP
PROGRAM TO RECRUIT AFRICAN-
AMERICAN CANDIDATES TO ATTEND
THE POLICE ACADEMY.
THIS INITIATIVE IS A PRO-ACTIVE
STEP IN MAKING THE DEPARTMENT
MORE REFLECTIVE OF THE
DEMOGRAPHICS OF OUR COMMUNITY.
>> Stewart: THE ATTORNEY
REPRESENTING THE BROWN FAMILY
SAYS CIVIL ACTION AGAINST WILSON
AND THE POLICE DEPARTMENT IS
POSSIBLE.
A JUSTICE DEPARTMENT CIVIL
RIGHTS INVESTIGATION INTO
BROWN'S SHOOTING IS ON-GOING.
ALSO TODAY, MICHAEL BROWN'S
PARENTS ATTENDED SERVICES AT THE
CHURCH WHERE THEIR SON'S FUNERAL
WAS HELD.
THE REVEREND AL SHARPTON GAVE
THE SERMON.
SHARPTON IS ALSO HELPING TO
RAISE MONEY TO REPAIR THE CHURCH
WHERE MICHAEL BROWN'S FATHER IS
MEMBER.
IT WAS BURNED ALONG WITH OTHER
BUILDINGS DURING PROTESTS LAST
WEEK.
IN THE MIDDLE EAST, BRITISH
HUMAN RIGHTS OBSERVERS SAY U.S.-
LED WARPLANES CONDUCTED AS MANY
AS 30 AIRSTRIKES OVERNIGHT IN
NORTHEASTERN SYRIA.
COALITION FORCES REPORTEDLY
TARGETED ISIS MILITANTS AROUND
THEIR DE FACTO CAPITAL IN RAQQA.
ACTIVISTS SAY AT LEAST 50 ISIS
MILITANTS WERE KILLED IN BOTH
THE AIRSTRIKES AND IN CLASHES
WITH KURDS ON THE GROUND.
AT THE SAME TIME, ANOTHER HUMAN
RIGHTS GROUP REPORTED THAT
SYRIAN WARPLANES TARGETED THE
SOUTHERN PROVINCE OF DARAA,
KILLING AT LEAST A DOZEN PEOPLE,
INCLUDING WOMEN AND CHILDREN.
IN EGYPT, PROTESTS ERUPTED
OVERNIGHT WITH DEMONSTRATORS
CONDEMNING YESTERDAY'S COURT
DECISION TO DROP CRIMINAL
CHARGES AGAINST OUSTED PRESIDENT
HOSNI MUBARAK.
TWO PEOPLE WERE REPORTEDLY
KILLED AND AT LEAST NINE OTHERS
INJURED WHEN SECURITY FORCES
STARTED FIRING TEAR GAS, WATER
CANNONS AND BIRDSHOT INTO THE
CROWDS AROUND CAIRO.
POLICE ARE BLOCKING ACCESS TO
TAHRIR SQUARE, THE SITE OF
EGYPT'S ARAB SPRING UPRISING IN
2011.
IN AFGHANISTAN, TALIBAN
INSURGENTS HAVE INTENSIFIED
ATTACKS IN THE CAPITAL CITY OF
KABUL TARGETING FOREIGNERS.
THIS AS KABUL'S POLICE CHIEF,
GENERAL MOHAMMED ZAHIR, ABRUPTLY
RESIGNED AMID THE INCREASING
VIOLENCE.
AUTHORITIES SAY A SOUTH AFRICAN
AID WORKER AND HIS TWO CHILDREN
WERE KILLED WHEN MILITANTS ARMED
WITH GUNS AND GRENADES STORMED A
COMPOUND OVERNIGHT.
TALIBAN FIGHTERS REPORTEDLY TOOK
SEVEN OTHER PEOPLE HOSTAGE.
AFGHAN SECURITY FORCES ENDED UP
KILLING THE ATTACKERS AND
FREEING THE HOSTAGES.
THE WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION
NOW ESTIMATES THAT MORE THAN
16,000 PEOPLE HAVE CONTRACTED
EBOLA AND NEARLY 7,000 HAVE
DIED.
EVEN MORE TROUBLING, THE W.H.O.
WARNS THAT THESE FIGURES COULD
BE A SIGNIFICANT
UNDERESTIMATION.
AND TODAY MARKS THE OFFICIAL END
OF WHAT'S BEEN A RELATIVELY
MELLOW HURRICANE SEASON.
IN FACT, IT'S BEEN A RECORD-
BREAKING NINE YEARS SINCE A
CATEGORY THREE OR STRONGER
HURRICANE MADE LANDFALL ALONG
THE U.S. COASTLINE.
THAT WAS 2005 WHEN HURRICANES
KATRINA AND WILMA HIT THE GULF
COAST AND FLORIDA.
METEOROLOGISTS DON'T COUNT
SUPERSTORM SANDY, SINCE IT WAS
NOT A HURRICANE WHEN IT MADE
LANDFALL IN 2012.
>> Stewart: EXPERTS EXPECT
TOMORROW'S SO-CALLED CYBER
MONDAY SALES TO SEE AN UPTICK
OVER LAST YEAR.
BUT WILL IT BE ENOUGH FOR
BUSINESSES TO CONSIDER THE
EXTENDED SHOPPING WEEKEND A
SUCCESS?
FOR SOME INSIGHT WE ARE JOINED
NOW BY SHELLY BANJO OF THE "WALL
STREET JOURNAL."
SHELLY, LET'S JUST TALK ABOUT
THE NUMBERS, THE SHEER NUMBERS.
WHAT KIND OF SPENDING WENT ON
AND WHEN DID IT HAPPEN GIVEN SO
MANY STORES OPENED ON THURSDAY?
>> SURE.
SO WE'RE SEEING SPENDING ON-LINE
SKYROCKET.
JUST UP DOUBLE DIGITS, JUST THE
SAME AS LAST YEAR.
REALLY GOING ABOVE YEARS PAST.
AND BOTH THANKSGIVING AND ON
FRIDAY AND THROUGHOUT THE
WEEKEND.
DIFFERENT NUMBERS HAVE COME
OUT VERSUS, YOU KNOW, HOW
THE BRICK AND MORTAR RETAILERS
HAVE FAIRED, BUT PRETTY MUCH ON
PAR WITH LAST YEAR.
>> Stewart: LET'S TALK ABOUT
THAT BRICK AND MORTAR VERSUS
ON-LINE DEBATE.
FOR AWHILE IT SEEMED THAT BRICK
AND MORTARS WERE A THING OF THE
PAST, EVERYONE WAS SHOPPING ON-
LINE, IS THAT THE CASE FOR THIS
YEAR?
>> I THINK THE ON-LINE PEOPLE
DEFINITELY ARE SHOPPING MORE BUT
PEOPLE STILL WENT OUT TO THE
STORES.
I WENT OUT TO I A WAL-MART ON
THURSDAY NIGHT AFTER
THANKSGIVING AND LINES WERE
OUT THE DOOR SO MUCH THAT I
COULDN'T EVEN GET IN.
SO OBVIOUSLY THAT IS ANECDOTAL
EVIDENCE.
BUT YOU ARE DEFINITELY STILL
SEEING PEOPLE SHOW UP AND GO
THE TO STORES.
>> Stewart: DID THE THURSDAY
OPENINGS HAVE AN IMPACT ON THE
BLACK FRIDAY SALES ON SATURDAY
>> I THINK IT JUST SHIFTS IT.
SO I THINK WHAT IS STARTING TO
HAPPEN IS YOU CAN'T REALLY JUST
LOOK AT THE BLACK FRIDAY
NUMBERS.
BECAUSE WHEN YOU ARE HAVING
SALES ALL WEEK, ESPECIALLY ON
MONDAY, TUESDAY, WEDNESDAY,
THURSDAY, YOU CAN'T JUST LOOK AT
THE BLACK FRIDAY NUMBERS IN
ISOLATION.
>> Stewart: SO THIS HAS BECOME
MORE OF A MARATHON RATHER THAN
ACTUALLY A SPRINT ON FRIDAY.
>> RIGHT, RIGHT.
>> Stewart: SO INTERESTING.
I WANT YOUR TAKE ON THE IDEA OF
THE SORT OF PACKAGING OF THIS
WEEKEND.
AS YOU HAVE BLACK FRIDAY AND
THEN SMALL BUSINESS SATURDAY AND
THEN TODAY IS GOOD SHOPPING
SUNDAY WHERE SOME STORES ARE
OFFERING A PERCENTAGE TO
CHARITIES, AND TOMORROW IS
CYBERMONDAY.
IS THIS ACTUALLY REFLECT
PEOPLE'S BEHAVIORS AND THEIR
WANTS OR IS THIS JUST A
MARKETING PLOY TO HAVE RETAILERS
JUST CONTINUE TO HAVE PEOPLE
FOCUSED ON SHOPPING.
>> RIGHT, I THINK IT'S PROBABLY
A LITTLE BIT OF BOTH.
I THINK THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE COMING TO EXPECT DEALS.
BUT I ASKED ONE OF THE WAL-MART
EXECUTIVES THIS QUESTION AND HE
SAID, YOU KNOW, LET'S JUST CALL
IT NOVEMBER AT THIS POINT, YOU
KNOW.
BECAUSE IT'S LIKE EVERY SINGLE
DAY THERE ARE SOME SORT OF
SALES, MARKETING GIMMICK.
AND NOT ONLY SALES BUT ALSO
PERSONALIZED E-MAILS TELLING YOU
TO COME IN, GET AN EXTRA 10% OFF
SO IT IS JUST ABOUT MESSAGING
AND HAMMERING DOWN TO THE
CONSUMERS, TO GET A DEAL TO COME
IN THE STORES AND SHOPPING.
>> Stewart: THERE IS ALSO AN
INTERESTING STATISTIC OUT THERE
THAT PEOPLE ARE SHOPPING FOR
THEMSELVES INITIALLY.
THAT THEY ARE SELF-GIFTING, IS
THIS GOOD NEWS FOR THE ECONOMY,
GOOD NEWS FOR THE SHOPPING
SEASON OR IS IT JUST AN EFFECT
OF THE ECONOMY THAT PEOPLE ARE
WAITING TO BUY THINGS THEMSELVES
SO THEY GO ON SALE?
>> I THINK PEOPLE ARE ALL
WAITING TO BUY THINGS FOR
THEMSELVES TO GO ON SALE, THINGS
LIKE FOR EXAMPLE LAPTOPS,
TELEVISION, SEEING A TON OF
CONSUMER ELECTRONICS THIS YEAR.
WHICH IS RARE AND INTERESTING
BECAUSE CONSUMER ELECTRONICS
HAVEN'T ACTUALLY BEEN DOING THAT
WELL.
SO A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
BUYING THESE THINGS FOR
THEMSELVES AND WAITING BECAUSE
THEY KNOW THE DISCOUNT IS GOING
TO COME TO YOU.
>> Stewart: TRADITIONALLY, THERE
IS A LULL AFTER THIS FIVE DAY
PERIOD.
WHAT IS THE FORECAST?
>> I THINK IT'S GOING TO BE A
STRUGGLE FOR RETAILERS TO KEEP
SHOPPERS COMING IN.
THEY'VE GOT THREE OR FOUR WEEKS
NOW UNTIL CHRISTMAS.
AND THERE IS GENERALLY A HUGE
BLACK FRIDAY WEEKEND AND THEN
THE SATURDAY BEFORE CHRISTMAS.
AND IN BETWEEN, THAT'S WHEN
THE REAL FIGHT IS GOING TO
BE.
>> Stewart: YOU SAID 10 AND 15%
DOESN'T CUT IT ANY MORE?
>> YEAH, YOU SEE THESE SIGNS
NOW, 40% OFF, 50% OFF, IN
OCTOBER.
SO WHY AM I GOING TO BE EXCITED
ABOUT 10 OR 15% AT A STORE?
>> Stewart: SHELLY BANJO FROM
"THE WALL STREET JOURNAL," THANK
YOU FOR BEING WITH US.
>> THANKS.
>> Stewart: STUDENT DEBT IS
SOMETHING MILLIONS OF AMERICANS
LIVE WITH FOR YEARS, EVEN
DECADES, AFTER THEY GRADUATE
FROM COLLEGE.
NOW, TWO OF THE NATION'S LARGEST
PRIVATE STUDENT LENDERS ARE
ROLLING OUT OPTIONS THAT WILL
ALLOW BORROWERS TO MODIFY THE
TERMS ON THEIR LOANS.
FOR MORE ABOUT THE SIGNIFICANCE
OF THIS, EARLIER HARI
SREENIVASAN SAT DOWN WITH MARIAN
WANG, A REPORTER WITH
"PRO PUBLICA" AND ANNA MARIA
ANDRIOTIS OF THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL."
>> Sreenivasan: SO ANNAMARIA,
LET ME START WITH YOU.
EXPLAIN THE CHANGE, WHAT KINDS
OF MODIFICATIONS ARE WE TALKING
ABOUT?
WHO DOES THIS APPLY TO?
>> SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
DECLINES IN THE INTEREST RATES
THAT STUDENT LOAN BORROWERS ARE
PAYING.
AND THIS ANNOUNCEMENT CAME OUT
OF WELLS FARGO THIS PAST WEEK.
WELLS FARGO IS THE SECOND
LARGEST PRIVATE STUDENT LENDER,
AND WHAT THEY HAVE DECIDED TO
START DOING IS TO LOWER THE
MONTHLY PAYMENT BY ESSENTIALLY
LOWERING THE INTEREST RATE TO AS
LOW AS ONE PERCENT FOR
BORROWERS.
THAT'S SIGNIFICANT BECAUSE
ACTUALLY MANY BORROWERS HAVE
PRIVATE STUDENT LOANS WITH
INTEREST RATES THAT ARE 10% OR
HIGHER THAN THAT.
SO WHAT THEY'RE STARTING TO SEE
IS SIGNIFICANT DECLINES IN WHAT
THEY'RE PAYING MONTHLY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND BANKS DIDN'T
WANT TO DO THIS.
WHY DID THEY GO FORWARD WITH
THIS?
>> THIS IS A SIGNIFICANT
TURNAROUND, AND THERE'S A LOT OF
DISCUSSION AS TO WHAT HAS LED TO
IT.
WHAT WE KNOW IS THAT OVER THE
PAST COUPLE OF YEARS THE
CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION
BUREAU HAS BEEN APPLYING A LOT
OF PRESSURE ON PRIVATE LENDERS,
BASICALLY TELLING THEM THAT THEY
NEED TO START OFFERING REPAYMENT
OPTIONS SIMILAR TO WHAT THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OFFERS ON ITS
LOANS.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT OFFERS A
LOT OF FLEXIBILITY FOR
BORROWERS, IN PARTICULAR THOSE
WHO DON'T HAVE HIGH SALARIES.
SO THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF BACK
AND FORTH BETWEEN THE C.F.P.B.
AND PRIVATE LENDERS.
IN ADDITION, FROM THE PRIVATE
LENDER SIDE, WHAT WE HAVE
STARTED HEARING IS THAT THERE
HAVE BEEN A LOT OF INTERNAL
DISCUSSIONS AT BANKS ABOUT HOW
DO WE INCREASE LOAN REVENUE
GOING FORWARD?
IF WE ALIENATE STUDENT
BORROWERS, PEOPLE WHO ARE RIGHT
NOW IN THEIR 20S AND EARLY 30S,
DOWN THE ROAD WHEN IT COMES TIME
FOR THEM TO GET A MORTGAGE OR
WHEN THEY'RE LOOKING TO
ESTABLISH SOME TYPE OF BANKING
RELATIONSHIP, WE MIGHT NOT GET
THOSE BORROWERS.
THEY MIGHT GO SOMEWHERE ELSE.
>> Sreenivasan: RIGHT, RIGHT,
RIGHT.
SO MARIAN, PUT THIS POPULATION
IN PERSPECTIVE FOR US, BECAUSE
AS SHE MENTIONED, THE FEDERAL
LOANS HAVE ALREADY BEEN DOING
SOME OF THIS IN THE PAST.
AND HOW MUCH CAN AN AVERAGE KIND
OF BORROWER SAVE IF THEY QUALIFY
FOR THIS MODIFICATION, DO YOU
THINK?
>> WELL, JUST TO GIVE A LITTLE
MORE CONTEXT, THE POOL OF
PRIVATE STUDENT LOAN BORROWERS
IS VASTLY OUTNUMBERED BY THE
POOL OF FEDERAL STUDENT LOAN
BORROWERS.
AND THE FEDS ORIGINATE A VAST
MAJORITY OF STUDENT LOAN DEBT.
AND YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY RIGHT THAT
THE FEDS HAVE FOR A LONG TIME
OFFERED INCOME-BASED REPAYMENT
PLANS, THINGS THAT WILL HELP YOU
SORT OF SCALE YOUR MONTHLY
PAYMENTS TO SOMETHING THAT'S
REASONABLE FOR YOU IF YOU
QUALIFY FOR THOSE PROGRAMS.
>> Sreenivasan: RIGHT.
SO IS THERE AN IDEA, IS THERE
KIND OF A BENCHMARK THAT THEY
KNOW ABOUT WHAT INCOME LEVEL
THIS IS GOING TO HIT SOMEONE AT,
AND IF THEY GO FROM 10% TO ONE
PERCENT, THAT'S OBVIOUSLY A
SIGNIFICANT SAVING, BUT IT ALSO,
I GUESS, DEPENDS ON HOW MUCH
THEY HAVE IN DEBT, RIGHT?
>> SURE, SO WHAT WELLS FARGO, AT
LEAST, HAS SAID IS IT'S GOING TO
LOOK AT THEIR OVERALL DEBT BY
LOOKING AT THE BORROWERS CREDIT
REPORTS AND THEY'RE LOOKING AT
THEIR INCOME, AND THEY'RE HOPING
TO COME TO SOMETHING LIKE A
MONTHLY PAYMENT THAT EQUALS
ABOUT 10 TO 15% OF THEIR INCOME.
NOW, WHAT'S ALSO INTERESTING IS
THAT DISCOVER, WHICH IS THE
THIRD LARGEST PRIVATE STUDENT
LENDER IN THE COUNTRY, IS ALSO
PLANNING ON ROLLING OUT LOAN
MODIFICATIONS EARLY NEXT YEAR.
WHAT WE'VE HEARD FROM THEM IS
THERE ARE POTENTIALLY EVEN MORE
SIGNIFICANT BREAKS THAT ARE
BEING CONSIDERED.
FOR INSTANCE, LOAN FORGIVENESS,
WHICH IS SOMETHING TOTALLY
UNHEARD OF THAT A PRIVATE LENDER
WOULD HAVE NEVER EVEN CONSIDERED
UP UNTIL RECENTLY.
AND IT'S IMPORTANT TO POINT OUT
THAT PRIVATE STUDENT BORROWERS,
THOUGH DEALING WITH A LOT OF
DIFFICULTIES, AS MARIAN POINTED
OUT, ARE A SMALL SHARE OF THE
OVERALL BORROWERS OUT THERE.
SO PRIVATE STUDENT LOAN DEBT
ACCOUNTS FOR ABOUT EIGHT PERCENT
OF OUTSTANDING STUDENT LOANS.
WE'VE SEEN A LOT OF BACK AND
FORTH BETWEEN LENDERS AND THE
C.F.P.B. LENDERS ARE SAYING, WHY
ARE YOU PICKING ON US WHEN THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS FOR
THE MAJORITY OF THAT OUT THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, SO
MARIAN, WHAT ABOUT THE ROLE THAT
PARENTS PLAY IN THIS?
A LOT OF PARENTS TAKE OUT
PRIVATE PERSONAL LOANS ON TOP OF
WHATEVER THE FINANCIAL AID
PACKAGE IS THAT THE UNIVERSITY
CAN GIVE, RIGHT?
>> WELL, YEAH, AND THERE'S
ACTUALLY A FEDERAL PROGRAM
THAT'S SPECIFICALLY GEARED AT
PARENTS THAT I DID A REPORT ON A
COUPLE YEARS AGO.
IT'S INTERESTING BECAUSE FEDERAL
STUDENT LOANS TO STUDENTS IN
PARTICULAR ARE CAPPED AT A
CERTAIN LEVEL.
YOU CAN ONLY BORROW SO MUCH IN A
YEAR.
AND SO, THERE'S NOT A LOT OF
UNDERWRITING AND THAT'S WHY
THERE'S A CAP.
THIS FEDERAL PROGRAM FOR
BORROWING SPECIFICALLY GEARED
TOWARD PARENTS, ACTUALLY IT'S
CALLED THE PARENT PLUS PROGRAM,
AND THAT'S AN INTERESTING
PROGRAM BECAUSE THOSE PROGRAMS
AREN'T CAPPED.
YOU CAN TAKE AS MUCH OUT AS YOU
NEED.
THERE'S VERY LIMITED
UNDERWRITING FOR THOSE LOANS.
AND THAT PROGRAM IS INTERESTING
BECAUSE YOU SEE A LOT OF THE
FINANCIAL STRAIN THAT FAMILIES
FACE THROUGH THAT PROGRAM
BECAUSE IT'S NOT CAPPED.
AND SO YOU CAN SEE MORE PARENTS
TAKING OUT MORE LOANS, TAKING
OUT LARGER LOANS THROUGH THIS
PROGRAM OVER TIME.
YOU'VE REALLY SEEN IT ESPECIALLY
IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS.
>> Sreenivasan: SO ARE THOSE
LOANS THROUGH THE PARENT PLUS
PROGRAM AT GREATER RISK FOR
DEFAULT IF, SAY FOR EXAMPLE, A
PARENT MAY NOT HAVE A STEADY
INCOME COMING IN BUT THEY STILL
QUALIFY TO TAKE OUT A HUGE LOAN
TO GET THEIR KIDS THROUGH
SCHOOL.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
THAT'S SOMETHING WE LOOKED AT.
THERE'S VERY LIMITED
UNDERWRITING WHERE THEY DON'T
LOOK AT YOUR DEBT-TO-INCOME
RATIO, LIKE A PRIVATE LENDER
WOULD.
AND THEY CAN TAKE OUT VAST
AMOUNTS OF MONEY, AS MUCH AS
THEY NEED, ESSENTIALLY, TO HELP
THEIR KID OUT, AND A LOT OF
PARENTS DO.
THAT'S ABSOLUTELY A THING THAT
PARENTS CAN GET OVEREXTENDED IN
DOING SO.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHAT ABOUT
THE ROLES THAT COLLEGES AND
UNIVERSITIES PLAY IN THIS TOO?
I MEAN, THERE DOESN'T SEEM TO BE
THAT MUCH TRANSPARENCY IN
FIGURING OUT EXACTLY WHAT THE
FINANCIAL AID PACKAGE IS AND WHY
ONCE STUDENT GOT THIS MUCH AND
ANOTHER STUDENT GOT THIS MUCH,
WHEN PERHAPS THEIR PARENTS MADE
THE SAME, RIGHT?
>> WELL, WHAT'S PLAYING OUT, THE
REASON WHY WE'RE SEEING MORE
BORROWERS, MORE STUDENTS COME
OUT OF SCHOOL WITH MORE DEBT IS
BECAUSE COLLEGE TUITION COSTS
KEEP RISING, RIGHT?
AND WHAT BECOME VERY CONFUSING
FOR FAMILIES IS WHEN FINANCIAL
AID PACKAGES GO OUT TO STUDENTS.
AND MOST SCHOOLS, WHAT THEY DO
IS THEY INCLUDE STUDENT LOANS AS
PART OF THE FINANCIAL AID
PACKAGE, FEDERAL STUDENT LOANS,
THAT IS, BUT ONE WOULD ARGUE IS
TO HOW MUCH OF AID IS A STUDENT
LOAN WHEN A STUDENT LOAN IS
SOMETHING YOU HAVE TO PAY BACK.
IT'S NOT LIKE GRANTS OR
SCHOLARSHIPS, FOR EXAMPLE.
SO COLLEGES FOR SURE DO PLAY A
LARGE ROLE HERE.
AND THERE'S BEEN THIS ONGOING
DEBATE ABOUT WHY SHOULD, FOR
INSTANCE, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
KEEP GIVING OUT MORE AND MORE
AID?
IT'S ESSENTIALLY INCENTIVIZING
THE COLLEGES TO CONTINUE
INCREASING THEIR TUITION BECAUSE
THEY'RE SAYING, WELL, THE
MONEY'S GOT TO COME FROM
SOMEWHERE, SOMEONE'S GOING TO
PAY FOR IT.
>> Sreenivasan: RIGHT.
>> AND TO YOUR QUESTION, TOO, I
THINK ABSOLUTELY, SCHOOLS NEED
TO BE BROUGHT INTO THIS.
SCHOOLS HAVE THEIR OWN POT OF
FINANCIAL AID, ESSENTIALLY.
AND THERE'S A STICKER PRICE, BUT
THEY DISCOUNT IT HEAVILY
DEPENDING ON WHAT KIND OF
STUDENT YOU ARE.
AND SO THEY HAVE YOUR FINANCIAL
INFORMATION AND THEY ARE
ESSENTIALLY MONEYBALLING
FINANCIAL AID THESE DAYS.
>> Sreenivasan: EXPLAIN THAT.
>> THERE'S A WHOLE INDUSTRY
CALLED ENROLLMENT MANAGEMENT.
THERE DIDN'T USED TO BE
ENROLLMENT MANAGERS AT SCHOOLS,
YOU KNOW, TWO DECADES AGO.
BUT THAT'S A POSITION THAT'S
SORT OF BEEN CREATED,
ESSENTIALLY TO USE DATA, TO
REALLY CREATE DETAILED STUDENT
PROFILES AND DO WHAT THEY CALL,
THIS IS ALL JARGON, BUT IT'S
FINANCIAL AID LEVERAGING.
HOW DOES THE SCHOOL GET THE
BIGGEST BANG FOR ITS FINANCIAL
AID DOLLAR?
AND SOMETIMES THAT MEANS THEY'RE
ESSENTIALLY PICKING STUDENTS
THAT THEY ARE OK HAVING OVER-
BORROW, VERSUS STUDENTS WHOM
THEY REALLY WANT AND WILL
GENERALLY TRY TO PROTECT FROM
HAVING TO BORROW.
AND SO THEY'RE TRYING TO
INCENTIVIZE CERTAIN STUDENTS
COMING AND CERTAIN STUDENTS THEY
CARE LESS ABOUT AND THEY'RE MORE
COMFORTABLE, HONESTLY PACKAGING
A STUDENT LOAN IN THAT FINANCIAL
AID PACKAGE.
AND THAT'S A DECISION THAT
SCHOOLS ARE MAKING, PICKING
WHICH STUDENTS ESSENTIALLY GET
MORE, AND WHICH STUDENTS WILL
HAVE TO BORROW MORE.
AND I THINK THAT SHOULD
DEFINITELY BE PUT ON SCHOOLS.
THE OTHER THING I THINK IS
REALLY IMPORTANT TO BRING UP IS
THAT IT'S ON SCHOOLS TO MAKE
SURE THAT KIDS ARE GRADUATING ON
TIME WITH A MEANINGFUL DEGREE.
AND THE SUREST WAY TO GET IN
OVER YOUR HEAD WITH STUDENT DEBT
IS TO DROP OUT AND HAVE DEBT FOR
COLLEGE AND NOTHING TO SHOW FOR
IT.
YOU DON'T HAVE THAT CREDENTIAL.
YOU DON'T HAVE THAT HIGHER
EARNING POWER.
THAT'S A HUGE SOURCE OF DEBT,
AND THAT'S REALLY A TERRIBLE
SITUATION FOR A STUDENT TO BE
IN.
THE OTHER THING IS GRADUATING ON
TIME.
IT'S A SURE WAY TO GET MORE DEBT
IF YOU STAY SIX YEARS VERSUS
YOUR PEER WHO'S ABLE TO GET OUT
IN FOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MARIAN WANG FROM "PRO PUBLICA"
AND ANNAMARIA ANDRIOTIS FROM THE
"WALL STREET JOURNAL," THANKS SO
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANKS FOR HAVING US.
>> Stewart: IF YOU THINK RECENT
COLLEGE GRADS ARE THE ONLY ONES
DEALING WITH STUDENT LOAN DEBT,
THINK AGAIN.
FIND OUT HOW AMERICA'S SENIORS
ARE AFFECTED.
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Stewart: AS YOU ARE ABOUT TO
SEE, MUSICIAN BETSE ELLIS HAS A
DISTINCTIVE, FIERY STYLE OF
FIDDLING.
BUT HER LOVE OF MUSIC FROM THE
OZARKS IN HER NATIVE ARKANSAS
WASN'T TRULY SPARKED UNTIL A
CHANCE MEETING WITH ANOTHER
FIDDLER, VIOLET HENSLEY, WHO
RECENTLY TURNED 98.
HERE'S THEIR STORY, WHICH WAS
PRODUCED BY OUR COLLEAGUES AT
KCPT IN KANSAS CITY MISSOURI.
♪
>> WHEN I FELL IN LOVE WITH
FIDDLE MUSIC, I FELL SO HARD,
AND I TURNED AWAY FROM PRETTY
MUCH ALL OTHER GENRES OF MUSIC
FOR YEARS.
AND IT WAS ONLY A FEW YEARS INTO
THAT FIRST FLUSH OF LOVING
TRADITIONAL FIDDLE MUSIC THAT I
MET VIOLET.
AND I HADN'T SPENT TOO MUCH TIME
WITH ELDER GENERATION PLAYERS
BEFORE THAT, I HAD MET A FEW.
I HAD BEEN REALLY EXCITED BY
SOME OF THOSE MEETINGS AND
INSPIRED BY OTHER OZARK FIDDLERS
IN PARTICULAR, ACTUALLY, BUT I
DIDN'T HAVE THAT MANY
INSPIRATIONS WHO WERE FEMALE.
AND MEETING VIOLET AND THIS
REALLY STRONG LADY, THAT FIRST
MEETING WAS SO IMPACTFUL AND SHE
WAS SO WELCOMING, AND SHE CARED
ENOUGH TO SPEND TIME WITH ME.
♪
>> I AM VIOLET HENSLEY.
I'M CALLED THE "WHITTLIN'
FIDDLER" BECAUSE I'VE MADE 73
FIDDLES, MADE FIDDLES AND PLAYED
FIDDLE.
I WANTED TO PLAY THE FIDDLE, I
GUESS, BECAUSE WE DIDN'T HAVE
ANYTHING ELSE TO DO.
BUT WE DIDN'T HAVE TELEVISION OR
RADIO.
AND DAD PLAYED IT, AND I GUESS
IT JUST STRUCK ME AS I WANTED TO
PLAY.
I CAN'T READ, I'M NOT A
MUSICIAN.
I JUST LEARNED IT, IT'S IN MY
HEAD.
IF I CAN'T PLAY IT IN MY HEAD, I
CAN'T PUT IT ON THE FIDDLE.
>> I LIKE THIS LADY RIGHT HERE,
TOO.
WE'VE BEEN FRIENDS ALL OF OUR
LIFE, BUT WE DIDN'T KNOW IT
UNTIL WE MET ABOUT 10 YEARS AGO.
(LAUGHTER)
♪
>> LEARNING A TUNE FROM VIOLET
GIVES ME THE OPPORTUNITY TO SEE
THE WHOLE PICTURE LITERALLY.
I LIKE TO THINK OF FIDDLE TUNES
AS MELODY.
THE NOTES COME IN THE EARS, AND
THEN THE BOWING COMES IN TO THE
EYES.
♪
AND SO I CAN SIT THERE AND WATCH
VIOLET AND SEE THE CIRCLES THAT
SHE DRAWS, THE LITTLE
HANDWRITING, AS SHE CALLS IT,
WITH HER WRISTS, AND I CAN SEE
HOW THAT HAS AN IMPACT ON THE
OVERALL TUNE.
♪
>> YEAH, SHE'S TRYING TO COPY MY
BOW WORK.
IT JUST HAPPENS TO BE MY ARM'S
WAY OF DOING THINGS.
I DEVELOPED THAT OVER THE YEARS
OF PLAYING.
I USED TO PLAY, MY DAD WAS KIND
OF A STIFF ARM FIDDLER.
I'M STILL GOING TO TEACH HER
SOME MORE.
♪
>> WELL, VIOLET HAS HER OWN
APPROACH TO THESE TUNES, SO SOME
OF THEM ARE SO UNIQUE THAT I'VE
NEVER HEARD THE LIKES OF THEM
ANYWHERE ELSE.
THERE ARE SOME TUNES THAT COME
DIRECTLY FROM HER FAMILY.
♪
YOU KNOW, VIOLET AND HER
EXISTENCE AND HER EXAMPLE SHE
PUTS OUT EVERYWHERE, IT'S ALSO A
GREAT REMINDER TO APPRECIATE
THOSE WHO HAVE LIVED VERY
DIFFERENT LIVES FROM OUR OWN,
PEOPLE WHO'VE LIVED LONGER THAN
WE HAVE AND THE MULTITUDE OF
LESSONS WE CAN GET FROM THEM.
♪
(CHEERS AND APPLAUSE)
>> Stewart: BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU
TONIGHT, UKRAINIAN LEADERS ARE
ACCUSING RUSSIA OF USING
HUMANITARIAN AID SHIPMENTS TO
SNEAK WEAPONS AND AMMUNITION AID
SEPARATIST REBELS.
OFFICIALS SAY A CONVOY OF 106
RUSSIAN VEHICLES CROSS INTO
UKRAINE'S EASTERN TERRITORY
TODAY WITHOUT KIEV'S PERMISSION.
AND IN HONG KONG, PRO-DEMOCRACY
PROTESTORS CLASHED WITH POLICE
TONIGHT AS THEY TRIED TO BLOCK
OFF GOVERNMENT HEADQUARTERS.
THE DEMONSTRATORS ARE STEPPING
UP DEMANDS FOR CANDIDATES NOT
PRE-SELECTED BY THE CHINESE
GOVERNMENT.
THAT IS IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I AM ALISON STEWART, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US, GOOD NIGHT.